Doug Banda is the senior fellow senior
fellow at the K Institute and former
Special Assistant to President Ronald
Reagan he joins us from Washington DC a
very warm welcome to Al jazer I could
start by asking you what purpose you
think uh this joint public appearance of
the heads of these two secretive
organizations serves right
now I think part of this is to put
gentle pressure on Israel both the
United States and United Kingdom have
been very strong supporters of Israel uh
provided arms backed them you know
diplomatically and what this tells me is
both of them are pushing hard if they're
working together you know trying to get
an agreement between Israel and Hamas
and there's General recognition that
Netanyahu has you know been a barrier to
getting that
agreement so they've um both talked at
length about the need to support the UN
Charter and Global norms and
international standards of law
particularly when it comes to Russia and
China but
there doesn't seem to be any mention of
Israel and breaches of international law
when it comes to the war in Gaza what
does that say to
you well what that tells me is that in
both countries Israel is a domestic
political issue I can state that
categorically in the United States uh
the Republican party uh never likes to
criticize Israel the Democratic party
has some divisions but President Biden
has declared he's the most Pro Israel
president ever you know so what that
does is makes politicians in the United
States reluctant to criticize Israel
even when it appears to be guilty of the
same breaches of international law as
other countries uh Doug stay with us
because I I want to open up the uh
conversation uh a little bit more
because both spy Chiefs also discussed
Russia's invasion of Ukraine a war
that's been going on for two and a half
years and a joint opinion piece they
said staying the cour forces more vital
than ever Putin will not succeed in
extinguishing Ukraine's sovereignty and
Independence Russia's actions are a
flagrant breach of the UN Charter in
global Norms as I mentioned on Ukraine's
surpris incursion in KK they said it was
a typically audacious and a bold move by
the ukrainians to try and change the
game and I think they have changed the
narrative and really brought the war
home to Russia Doug back to you uh I
mean how might Russia and China do you
think calibrate its response to what
we've heard from the UK and US spy Chief
I mean Putin's often cast by Western
intelligence agencies as the Eternal
Bond villain that the world needs saving
from is there a degree of double
standards
here well of course quite honestly you
Saudi Arabia has killed more yemenis
than uh you know Russia has killed
ukrainians the United States invasion of
Iraq was a flagrant violation of
international law you know so there's an
element of do what we say not as we do
you know that what we see Russia having
done was a blatant aggression it was
wrong and he deserved to be criticized
and deserved to have a world reaction
but you would wish that the countries
doing the criticizing would also live by
the same standards and unfortunately
both the United States and United
Kingdom have some problems in that
regard what do you mean by problems in
that regard help us
understand well first for example you
know the invasion of Iraq it was you
know conducted heavily by the United
States and backed by the United Kingdom
the Blair government and that was
clearly a violation of international law
the justifications were basically you
know you can argue whether they were
lies or misjudgments but they were wrong
hundreds of thousands of Iraqi civilians
ended up dying and you look at the
treatment of Israel you know a
willingness not to talk about you know
what Israel has done in a country like
Saudi Arabia both the US and United
Kingdom love to sell weapons to Saudi
Arabia and they don't worry about how
those weapons have been used and an
awful lot of yemeni civilians innocent
people have died over the last decade
you know with Saudi Arabia and the
amadis involved been really interesting
talking to you Doug Doug band senior
fellow at the Kato Institute and former
Special Assistant to President Ronald
Reagan many
thanks make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer